
Evening of Saturday, September 28, 2002

The sky was excellent tonight! It was clear, dark, and moonless. I was
not prepared to take out the telescope but I did look around a bit with
my 7x50 binoculars. I spent time in particular scanning over Per and
Cas. I saw many objects.

In Per both M-34 on the west side of the constellation and NGC-1528 on
the east side make excellent binocular objects. I particularly liked the
view of NGC-1528. I also studied the area around Alpha Per. There are
many bright stars in this vicinity that make it nearly as interesting as
the Pleiades cluster (which was also just above the horizon). While this
area is not normally marked as a cluster on the charts, it certainly
looks like one in wide field binoculars or with the naked eye.

The double cluster was quite compact looking in the 7x50s but also very
rich. Even to the naked eye it stood out nicely as two fuzzy balls. It
seems like an impressive object in all instruments! North of the double
cluster is an obvious and interesting looking association of stars that
might be marked as Mel-15 on SkyAtlas 2000. The cluster-like nature of
the grouping seems clear in the binoculars although it is a large object
and not very condensed. I imagine it would not look nearly as
interesting in a telescope.

In Cas I saw what I later identified on the atlas as NGC-663. It was a
surprisingly interesting object in the binoculars: round, partially
resolved, clearly more concentrated than the star background.

The cluster NGC-752 in And (most easily found from Tri) is an impressive
object in the binoculars. It is rich, partially resolved, and very
interesting. It isn't a perfectly round cluster and it seems to have
stars spread over an unusually wide range of brightnesses. It was also
faintly visible to the naked eye tonight.

M-33 in Tri was beautifully visible in the binoculars. I attempted to
locate it with the naked eye but I didn't have any luck this evening.
Cyg was on zenith and the North American Nebula was *clearly* visible in
the binoculars. It was one of the more impressive views of that object
that I've seen. The distinctive outline of the nebula was easy to
discern.

I was only outside for about 20 to 25 minutes, but despite its short
length, it was a most enjoyable session.

Peter
